Today we will study one of the
most well-known tools or
models of strategic analysis,
which is the 5 forces of
Porter.
This model is studied by
everyone in the career, in
any career related to
business administration
or in any graduate program
also as an MBA, any business
related program.
And it's a tool that is born of
Michael Porter, who is one of the
gurus, if not the biggest guru
of strategy and marketing worldwide.
He is the father of many of the
concepts and theories we study,
of literature in general, of
management and that we will
study in particular in The
Power MBA.
The first thing I want you
to know is why are the
5 forces of Porter?
It is designed to help us
assess the profitability
of a business.
The profitability of a sector
is sustainable, right?
But no, I think I would say more, not
only that, but that in addition the 5
forces of Porter, now you will understand
it, helps you understand the dynamics
of a sector, helps you to have
a photo with greater height, right?
The different factors affecting
a sector.
The term “force” is used very
well in this case, right?
There are five forces.
The power that the comparers
have over you.
The threat or risk that there
is a substitute product.
The threat of entering new competitors,
which is very much
related to entry barriers.
The power your suppliers
have over you.
And these four forces ultimately
do what they do is influence
the degree of competitive rivalry
that we begin with replacement
products.
Replacement products
are products that you
may not currently compete
with, but that meet
the same needs.
I will give you a very clear
example, beer and wine.
Beer and wine are
often substitutes.
This makes the profitability
within the beer and wine sector
look somewhat compromised.
And in fact, if beer has gained
market share in the last 30 years,
replacing wine, a very good substitute
product, especially in certain
uses of wine, it is very
clear that if there are
products in your sector or outside
your sector there are products
that can replace the value of
the products or services
that your sector is offering,
profitability can be
compromised.
It is a very strong force that must
be valued.
We are going to face the threat of new competitors.
This factor is one of the most
important and it is also that we
will devote an entire class because
it is related to the entrance
barriers.
If entry barriers are
high, the threat of new
competitors is lower.
I will give you an example because
we will look at it in more detail.
For example, if you need a
huge investment to enter
your industry, the barriers
to entry are higher.
Or if your industry, for example, is regulated.
Imagine, we are talking about a
restaurant that has a license.
The barrier to entry is even
greater if you need licenses
to compete.
The pharmacies in Spain are
doing the same.
They are regulated by these licenses.
This makes your sector more profitable
because it is protected.
There is less threat from new competitors.
Or if there are patents
or technologies or some type
of protection that protects you from
new competitors.
Sometimes the entry barriers,
for example, are given by access
to distribution channels.
This is changing, and I'
ll give you the opposite example.
Today, Amazon, for example, this
type of marketplace, that of
platforms or e-commerce, are
becoming the main distribution
channels of very many
brands, of very many manufacturers
and the access to therefore,
Amazon is decreasing the
barriers of entry
in many sectors.
Because you can get into competing
with current manufacturers
selling through Amazon.
Without having to depend, imagine
getting into agreement with a lot of distributors.
Well, I think the concept is very
easy to understand.
Now, let's go to the power of the suppliers.
This force determines what is if
suppliers have a lot of power
over you, your profitability
will be seen and we'll see it
with two examples that are opposite.
We'll go to a Orange store.
I'm talking about the business of
the distributor, the small
businessman who has a store in Orange.
One store or five?
It does not matter.
In this case, who is your provider?
Their provider is Orange, with whom
they have an agreement, a true alliance.
Well, in this case it is very clear
that the provider is much more
you do not need because you can
study for many other distributors
that it has.
It is clear that if we analyze this
sector and cover up the business
model of an Orange distributor,
this is a clear weakness.
It is a force that restores
profitability, because the reality
is that operators, in this case
like Orange, but I'm not talking
about an object of Orange, but in
general, with their distribution
channel have a lot of power over
their distribution channel.
You can change the conditions, etc.
What it does, obviously, is
to decrease the profitability, which,
as you know, is the goal
of this tool.
But now we go to the opposite,
right?
We will think of a large
food distributor, such as Mercadona,
for example, or Correfour,
whoever is worth us.
In this case, your suppliers,
well, by the way, I'm sharing
the supply chain that
helps a lot to understand
this kind of thing in a sector,
right?
Well, in this case, if
providers are larger or smaller
than you, then in principle
they are smaller than you.
You have a lot of power
over your customers.
In this case, the force, this
force, what it does is favor
you.
And you have heard, we have
analyzed it, really the profitability
of Mercadona is being boosted
because it can have a lot
of power over suppliers, tighten
suppliers, as all the
large distributors
do, right?
Now let's go to the
other case, let's analyze
the power that buyers have
over us.
If the buyers have a lot of power
over us, if they are bigger,
more potent, etc., then we will
have a profitability problem
sooner or later, always,
right?
Let us think of a raw material
producer, for example,
a farmer, and this farmer
turns out to be a supplier
of a large food distribution
chain such as Mercadona.
Let us put the same case.
What is much more powerful than
you is much bigger than you.
You can tighten, you can change for
another, etc., profitabilities go
down, of course.
There is a very interesting concept
here that we have already seen in
the course of business model analysis
that is exchange costs.
If you remember, the exchange
costs are the ease, the degree
of ease with which you, your
buyers change, change
producers, change suppliers,
right?
You are a software manufacturer,
I put SAP, but any one is worth
us and your customers have
high exchange costs.
It's very difficult to change software
and that benefits you.
That benefits SAP and software
manufacturers a lot, right?
It is very difficult to change.
We have already seen it at the time,
but it is that there are companies
or sectors whose exchange costs
are very low and here I share on
screen a comparison of insurance, right?
The car insurance can be changed
in one day.
It is very easy to change car insurance,
so for insurance companies
this is a problem because the cost
of changing their customers is very
low and that does, we will see
it later, like all the forces,
that in the end the competitive
war is greater.
Another factor that determines the
degree of power that buyers have
over you is that your proposal
is the same as that of others,
that that of others is the sector.
If it is a very commoditized sector
in which everyone offers the same thing
and it is only a price issue, because
the power it has bought on you is
enormous because it changes you, it
changes you the next day for
another because it gives you the
same as another, because it is that
you offer the same thing, right?
Well, in the end, these four
forces that we have analyzed,
the power of buyers, the
power of substitutes, the
threats of entry, of the possible
entrances of new competitors,
that is, the barriers of entry,
the power that suppliers have,
all this, these four what they
do is influence much or determine
the rivalry, the degree of
competitive rivalry that
there is within a sector,
right?
It is the consequence.
We usually say that almost
all sectors are red oceans.
This is a term that we will use
a lot when we analyze the
blue ocean strategy.
What is happening in the Red Ocean?
Well, what happens is that when there
is a lot of competitive war,
because there are price wars, you
have to invest permanently
to differentiate because if you are
not competitive and that permanent
investment, what it does is lower
your profitabilities, is it worth it?
More competitive rivalry is always
the same, always with lower profitabilities.
Well, we'll see a case in which
red ocean, but well, we could
put a lot and we'll think about
commercial banking.
What is happening in the commercial banking?
Well, there are a lot of competitors
or almost all are similar
or very similar, right?
They offer the same.
The proposal is very similar, very comfortably.
This is what it does, what happens
with this is that obviously the profitabilities
go down because, as we have said,
customers give them the same
to work with one bank than with
another, etc.
And there is also another concept
I want to add today that I want you to know.
This is the concept of exit barriers.
I will give you an example.
If competitors within a sector,
all have made strong investments
to be in that sector and out
of that sector, would involve
huge drag costs or, for
example, being in that
sector is absolutely
strategic.
They cannot go out.
Whatever the situation, they cannot go out.
This is what we call exit barriers.
What happens when there
are barriers?
If you are trapped, if you are
forced to compete within
a sector, whatever happens,
you won't get out.
You are encouraged to make the
competitive struggle much bigger
and this makes the profitability
bigger.
If we put a group of companies into
competition and we will make the
sign that we have put a fence out
and they can't get out, they have no
other option than to fight for that
market share.
If, however, the output barriers
are smaller and competitors
can get out, because as soon as the
profitability is not very high,
they will get out and those who
stay inside will be
benefited by it.
Well, we have already seen the five
forces of Porter, we have analyzed one
by one and as we have seen determines
the profitability of a sector.
How is this tool used?
In each case of analysis,
some forces will have some
application and others will not.
It is important to identify
which sectors are affected.
And really you can do an analysis
at this level, there is no need
to go into much more level.
As I have said many times, analysis,
let's say, in which you don't lose
the details, are those that allow
you to quickly identify,
get more valuable conclusions.